application query running slow

check locks in the database
Use TOP command to check the CPU usages
check temp space ....
network issue..
query exactly same or modified...
lot of dmls would have happened recently.. hence stats might be outdated.
any jobs running (datapump,rman,batch jobs)
any bg process consuming more memory..
was table index dropped today ?
was there any database patch aapplied recently ?
sql profile/hash value changed for query ?

awr report 
load profile
  db time-- amount of time oracle  spent on database user calls
  db cpu - amount of time server spent on user calls
  redo size - 
  physical read - Whenever a new data block is requested, it has to be fetched from the physical datafiles residing on the physical disks
  physical write - Whenever a new data block is insert, it has to be fetched from the physical datafiles residing on the physical disks
  user calls - 
  transaction - how many per second 
  parsing hard
  
wait events
  DB File Sequential Read - it occurs when we are trying to access data using index and Oracle is waiting for the read of index block from disk to    buffer cache to complete
  Db File Scattered Read - except that Oracle will read multiple data blocks. Multi-block reads are typically used on full table scans. 
  Library Cache lock - compilation/Parsing of Package/Procedure/Function
  Control File Parallel Write - CKPT process write checkpoint position in online redo logs to control files every 3 secs
  Buffer busy waits - When a session wants to access data block in buffer cache that is currently in use by some other session. 
  
sql statistics 
  sql ordered by cpu time
  SQL ordered by reads
It is the number of physical reads from the disks before we load the buffer cache and present the data to user access.
  SQL ordered by Gets/Buffer Gets
It is the number of logical reads from the buffer cache to the user process. 
From Oracle’s point of view, buffer get is logical I/O  and disk read is physical I/O.  

 http://sandeepnandhadba.blogspot.com/2014/06/sql-ordered-by-gets.html
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QPJL1fswbO4
